---
title: Essay 2
layout: about
permalink: /essay-02.html
---

{% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="Introduction;Legislation;Roadblocks;Conclusion;Notes" %}

# 20th Century Legislation, Policies, and Reforms for Immigration in the United States.

## Introduction

At the beginning of the 20th century, an ideological shift in America changed a historically open attitude toward those coming to our shores. The United States has a long history with immigration; in many ways, our nation as we know it today was founded on it. Unless you are Native American, one can say that we are all immigrants. Nevertheless, according to an NYU press blog in 2019, 45.7% of Americans felt that deportation was a good solution for immigration issues.[^1] This complicated and arduous relationship with immigration had created a growing bureaucracy, coupled with a powerful self-preservation ideology. Governmental policies limiting and controlling immigration from the beginning of the 20th century created a powerful government bureaucracy and significantly reduced the freedom to enter the United States; simultaneously, a highly regulatory structure systematically created illegality for immigrants even after many of those policies changed.

President William McKinley greeted visitors on September 6th, 1901. Unbeknownst to him, one of the hands that he would attempt to shake was concealing a revolver, which put two bullets in his chest before the President was able to clasp hands with the man. These bullet wounds came from a self-proclaimed anarchist named Leon Czolgosz, leading to President McKinley’s death a week later.[^2]  In the September 7th edition of the San Fransisco Call, writer Henry E Highton wrote, “In the midst of righteous indignation, Americans will preserve their balance, but they have learned their lesson and will sternly administer the remedy.”[^3] This stern remedy would play out through the rest of the 20th century.

{% include feature/image.html filename="Anationsgrief.jpg" alt="Political Cartoon" caption="This illustration entitled, 'The Nations Grief', by cartoonist Clifford Berryman, which appeared in the Washington Post on September 15, 1901, reflects the somber occassion of the assassination of President William McKinley." width="75" link="https://catalog.archives.gov/id/6010380" %}

In her article entitled Global Anti-Anarchism: The Origins of Ideological Deportation and the Suppression of Expression, Julia Rose Krant explains that this was the “shot that shocked the world.” Asserting that this assassination began a trend that would persist throughout the 20th century, shifting governmental response toward immigrants and authorizing exclusion and even deportation of immigrants based on their “ideological beliefs, associations, and/or expressions.”[^4]

Much of the 20th century was wrought with anti-immigration sentiments and the desire to limit specific people groups from coming into the U.S. However, there is no mention of immigration, limitations, or deportation in the constitution.[^5] Anti-immigration feelings were strong in the 19th century, and The Chinese exclusion act was written in the spring of 1882. This legislation “was the first significant law restricting immigration into the United States.”[^6]  This act was challenged and upheld in 1889 by the Supreme court in Chae Chan Ping vs. the United States. “Chae Chan Ping argued that the federal government had no authority to regulate immigration.” This challenge was rejected by the Supreme court and set a precedent for Congress to limit the immigration of people they deemed problematic. However, the trend toward limiting and controlling immigration on a large scale mainly happened within the 20th century. Many policies and legislation were enacted to severely limit people’s ability to immigrate throughout this time period. This legislative process began a bureaucratic precedent of restricting groups based on nationality, literacy, physical aptitude, lifestyle choices, and even financial soundness. Throughout the years of fluctuating legislation, there was a simultaneous implementation of restrictive controls, disciplinary actions, and roadblocks that began to criminalize immigration. 


{% include feature/image.html filename="try this.png" alt="Party Platforms of the 20th century" caption="Uses of the words: Immigration, Immigrant, Deportation, Quotas" width="100" %}



President William McKinley was greeting visitors on September 6, 1901. Unbeknownst to him, one of the hands that he would attempt to shake was concealing a revolver, which put two bullets in his chest before the President was ever able to clasp hands with the man. These bullet wounds came from a self-proclaimed anarchist named Leon Czolgosz, leading to President McKinley’s death a week later.[^2]  In the September 7 edition of the *San Fransisco Call*, writer Henry E Highton wrote, “In the midst of righteous indignation, Americans will preserve their balance, but they have learned their lesson and will sternly administer the remedy.”[^3]  This stern remedy would play out through the rest of the 20th century.


## 20th-Century Legislation

The Alien Immigration Act, also known as the Anarchist Exclusion Act, was implemented in 1903, marking a shift in government regulation regarding immigrants. This act contained 28 rules that were to govern immigration laws and regulations. It also lined out specific immigrants excluded from admission in the United States.

*“All idiots, insane persons, epileptics, and persons who have been insane within five years previous; persons who have had two or more attacks of insanity at any time previously; paupers; persons likely to become a public charge; professional beggars; persons afflicted with a loathsome or with a dangerous contagious disease; persons who have been convicted of a felony or of a crime, or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; polygamists, anarchists, or persons who believe in or advocate the over¬ throw, by force or violence, of the Government of the United States, or of all government, or of all forms of law, or the assassination of public officials; prostitutes, and persons who procure or attempt to bring in prostitutes or women for the purpose of prostitution;”*[^7]


{% include feature/image.html filename="immigration.primarysource.png" alt="Primary Source" caption="Text excerpt from Commission to investigate condition of immigration at Ellis Island" width="100" link="https://archive.org/details/reportofcommissi00unit_88/page/16/mode/2up" %}


The wave of limiting immigration legislation persisted throughout the first half of the 20th century. Many saw this as the era of restrictions, constantly limited immigration through the government bureaucracy. Although more immigration laws were enacted after 1903, the next significant push for immigration legislation stemmed from fears created during World War 1. Because of the mass immigration that resumed after World War 1, Congress reacted with the Emergency Quota Law of 1921. This law was the first legislation severely limiting the number of immigrants allowed to enter the United States. This act of Congress reduced immigration to allow 350,000 people per year. It also specified quotas that only 3% of the total population of that nationality, based on the 1910 census.[^8]  

On top of the quotas, there were strict rules regarding the requirements to come into the United States, “The State Department distributed a limited number of visas each year through U.S. Embassies abroad, and the Immigration Service only admitted immigrants who arrived with a valid visa.”[^9]  Much of these limitations and quotas were based on the belief that America should limit immigrants from “undesirable” areas. “The immigration quotas of 1921 started a long line of legislation that attempted to block certain types of immigration. Immigration statistics display these quotas’ detrimental effect on specific ethnic groups.”[^10]

This limitation intensified in the National Origins Act of 1924, the most restrictive legislation in U.S. history. This act effectively displayed the power of Congress in immigration policies, giving them complete control.[^11]  The total number of allowed immigrants was again lowered, allowing just 165,000 people per year. New quotas brought the limits down to just 2% of the total population of any nationality based on the 1890 census. However, these quotas did not include any immigrants from the Western Hemisphere.[^12]  In her article The Architecture of Race in American Immigration Law: A Reexamination of the Immigration Act of 1924, Mae Ngai acknowledges that quotas were only the first significant part of the Immigration Act of 1924. The second was “the exclusion of person’s ineligible to citizenship,” therefore limiting up to half of the population of the world from immigrating to the United States.[^13]  In 1929 the National Origins Act changed again, limiting the number of persons to 150,000 and linking the 2% quota to the 1920 census. This change limited the immigrants entering the United States from eastern and southern Europe even more significantly.[^14]

During this era of anti-immigration policies, many still fought to limit those coming from eastern Europe. There were slight improvements to the very severe bottleneck of existing restrictions within the 1940s. In 1943, The United States Congress passed a bill that repealed the laws restricting Chinese immigrants. This bill changed the existing quota system allowing up to 105 Chinese immigrants to enter the country every year.[^15]  The number of refugees, specifically German Jewish refugees, had been growing since Hitler came into power in 1933.[^16]  Eventually, America could not turn a blind eye to the realities of World War 2 and the massive amount of people forced to leave their homelands. The Displaced Persons Act of 1948 allowed for approximately 200,000 refugees, defined as “Eligible Displaced persons” or orphans.[^17]  These displaced people were given visas without regard to existing quotas.    

{% include feature/image.html filename="jewishkids.png" alt="Eastern European Jewish war orphans arrive in the United States" caption="Eastern European Jewish war orphans arrive in the United States" width="100" link="http://search.archives.jdc.org/notebook_ext.asp?item=14472&site=ideaalm&lang=ENG&menu=1" %}

Once again, there was more modification to the National Origin Quota system, and in 1952 the Immigration and Nationality Act was put into place. This act revised but still upheld the national origins quota Immigration Act of 1924 but ended the exclusion of Asians from immigrating into the United States. Under this act, they “introduced a system of preferences based on skillset and family reunification.”[^18]  Surprisingly, the U.S. Department of State Archive acknowledged that then-President Truman was concerned about the 1952 Act and maintaining the National Origins quotas. Truman felt that the laws were discriminatory and vetoed it; however, there was enough support for the law in Congress that they outvoted his veto.[^19]  This law also gave some surprising power to the President of the United States. In section 212 it states:

*"Whenever the President finds that the entry of any aliens or of any class of aliens into the United States would be detrimental to the interests of the United States, he may by proclamation, and for such period as he shall deem necessary, suspend the entry of all aliens or any class of aliens as immigrants or nonimmigrants, or impose on the entry of aliens any restrictions he may deem to be appropriate."*[^20]

{% include feature/image.html filename="section212.png" alt="Section 212" caption="Section 212 of the 1952 Immigration and Nationality Act - Presidential Powers" width="100" %}

This legislation cleared up the federal government’s role in immigration laws, stating that the President’s role was to enforce the laws. However, he was subservient to Congress, which would make the laws regarding immigration.[^21] 

As the push for civil rights began to drive national policy, the realities of immigration laws could not be overlooked. In 1965 amendments to the immigration and nationality act (H.R. 2580) were signed by President Johnson, which finally changed the National Origins quota.[^22]  In a statement by the Attorney General to the Immigration and Nationality subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee on March 3rd, 1965, it was stated that “these evils of principle in the national origin system are compounded by its cruelties and practice, cruelties so needless that they alone provide an abundant reason for changing this system.

In an increasing congressional drive to repair racist and overzealous laws, the Immigration Reform and Control Act became law in 1986. Under this law, immigrants who had continually resided in the United States since January 1st, 1982, could apply for legal status. This legislation also prohibited employers from hiring undocumented immigrants.[^23]  The Immigration Reform and Control Act granted about 3 million immigrants legal status. It also allowed some rights to workers in agricultural jobs.[^24]  “Prior to 1986, the police and the INS did not need a warrant to search fields for illegal immigrants, but those protecting agricultural interests pushed for law enforcement to treat open fields in the same way as enclosed workspaces” [^25]

In what many call the strictest legislation ever enacted on illegal immigration, the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act was signed in 1996. Moreover, it focused mainly on the criminalization of illegal immigration, and it expanded the criminal ground for deportation, although it was not considered crime legislation.[^26]  This law made it easier to deport immigrants attempting to enter the United States without proper documentation.  It also applied retroactively and established a precedent to deport immigrants without a formal hearing.[^27]

President Clinton described this legislation as “It strengthens the rule of law by cracking down on illegal immigration at the border, in the workplace, and in the criminal justice system—without punishing those living in the United States legally.”[^28] In her article for the Journal of Migration and Human Security, Patrisia Macías-Rojas recognizes that “Though the law’s primary enforcement targets were immigrants convicted of crimes, many long-term, legal permanent residents were caught in its dragnet.”[^29] 


## Roadblocks

{% include feature/image.html filename="Physical_examination_of_female_immigrants_at_Ellis_Island,_New_York_City_LCCN95506353.jpg" alt="Physical Examinations" caption="Physical Examinations of Female Immigrants at Ellis Island, New York City" width="75" %}

Paralleling the growing and changing legislation in the United States, a development began where the United States government would create a bureaucratic system that included an ever-growing series of roadblocks to make immigration logistically much more difficult. In actuality, these roadblocks curbed the ability of many to immigrate to the United States even as the legislation surrounding immigration became less restrictive. They also allowed for a new level of criminalization and immigration, giving government agencies power and creating criminals of those unable to jump through the hoops of bureaucracy. 

Congress passed the Immigration Act of 1917, which included the requirement that those immigrating must have the ability to read and write in their native language. This year marked the beginning of the Immigration Service using literacy tests as a prerequisite to immigration.   

{% include feature/pdf.html filename="0879.pdf" caption="Outburst of Everett True" width="50" link="https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83045487/1917-02-02/ed-1/seq-11/" %}

Due to the realities of World War 1, it is not surprising that President Woodrow Wilson was given many liberties in how he controlled the travel of immigrants. In August of 1918, he issued a presidential proclamation, also known as the Travel Control Act, requiring passports for any departure or departure entry into the United States. Congress did limit President Wilson’s “executive discretion when it came to citizens, even during wartime.”  

In response to the strict legislation and quotas legislated in 1921 and 1924, there was suddenly a massive rise in what was now considered illegal immigration. Land borders were the most accessible place to gain entry into the United States.   Consequently, in 1924 Congress approved the creation of the Border Patrol, “authorizing the expenditure of funds for both a land and coast patrol.”  A 1949 document created by the U.S. Department of Justice: Immigration and Naturalization Service explains the origins and purpose of the Border Control. “Its primary function is to detect and prevent the smuggling and unlawful entry of aliens into the United States, and to apprehend persons guilty of such violations.” This same document states that during the fiscal years from “July 1st, 1936, to June 30th, 1947, the Border Patrol apprehended 495,532 persons for violation of immigration and other laws”, working in connection with Federal, State, and local law enforcement.  

The Alien Registration Program was implemented in 1940 as a World War 2 national security measure. This program required all non-citizens over 14 to be fingerprinted and registered with the Immigration and Naturalization Service. This documentation requirement included those current resident non-citizens in the United States and those newly arriving. Each immigrant was given an AR-2 Form “individually stamped with a unique personal identifier” and number. This program lasted through March 31st, 1944, but over 5.6 million non-citizens were registered in those four years.   In actuality, the Alien Registration Act “required any alien seeking to enter the United States, as well as those already in the country, to be registered and fingerprinted, with deportation as a potential consequence for noncompliance.”  This program created a way to track and monitor non-citizens and criminalize them for immigration violations. 

{% include feature/image.html filename="AR-2 form.png" alt="Original Alien Registration Form" caption="AR-2 for Victor Hinkelman (A2427853)" width="100" link="https://historyhub.history.gov/community/genealogy/immigration-and-naturalization-records/blog/2021/05/20/1940-alien-registration" %}

Since April 1st, 1944, AR-2 forms have been replaced with alien files or “A-Files.” Although originated by the Immigration and naturalization service (INS), now The United States Citizenship and Immigration Service (USICS) records every active case that passes through the United States immigration and inspection process.  
The criminalization of immigration shifted significantly in 1996 with President Clinton’s Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act. This legislation shifted undocumented immigration into a crime, entangling it with law enforcement and crime control. “When the Department of Justice began tracking immigrants in the federal criminal justice system, the Bureau of Justice Statistics reported that the majority, approximately 55 percent, were legal permanent residents with longstanding ties to the United States and no prior criminal history.”   In his 2014 article, Daniel Fisher acknowledges that “As a result, at least a third of the non-citizens living in this country are subject to deportation by the administration under existing law.” 

Although deportations were first categorized in the year 1908, deportation by federal immigration and naturalization agencies has become a reality for many immigrants, this practice was less common through the first part of the 20th century and saw a drastic increase after the 1980s. In the article Employment and Exile: U.S. Criminal Deportations, 1908 - 2005, this chart shows the number of deportations every year along with the percentage of all deportations that involved criminal behavior as the reason for removal. 

{% include feature/image.html filename="criminal deportations.png" alt="Criminal Deportations in the United States 1908-2005" width="100" link="https://www-jstor-org.uidaho.idm.oclc.org/stable/10.1086/664824?seq=17" %}

Authors Ryan D. King, Michael Massoglia, and Christopher Uggen analyze this table; they state, “We find no significant association between the change in criminal deportations and changes in the homicide rate, immigration, or the unemployment rate. However, we again note that the relationship between unemployment and deportations is likely contingent on larger legal, bureaucratic, and social shifts that occurred throughout the 20th century.” 


## Conclusion



## Notes

[^1]:Gordon Ann et al., “Fear of Immigration,” From The Square, January 3, 2020, https://www.fromthesquare.org/fear-of-immigration/. 
[^2]:Justin Broubalow, “Anarchy in the USA: Fear and Loathing in the Early 20th Century,” History Associates Incorporated, September 10, 2020, https://www.historyassociates.com/anarchy-in-the-usa/.
[^3]:Henry E. Highton, “The San Francisco Call. [Volume] (San Francisco [Calif.]) 1895-1913, September 07, 1901, Image 7,” News about Chronicling America RSS (Charles M. Shortridge), https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn85066387/1901-09-07/ed-1/seq-7/.
[^4]:Julia Rose Kraut, “Global Anti-Anarchism: The Origins of Ideological Deportation and the Suppression of Expression.” Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies 19, no. 1 (2012): 169-171. https://doi.org/10.2979/indjglolegstu.19.1.169.
[^5]:“Report of the Commission Appointed by the President on September 16, 1903 to Investigate the Condition of the Immigration Station at Ellis Island: United States. Commission to Investigate Condition of Immigration at Ellis Island,” (Internet Archive. Washington, Gov't print. off., 1904), https://archive.org/details/reportofcommissi00unit_88/page/16/mode/2up.
[^6]:Beth Rowan and Logan Chamberlain, “Immigration Legislation,” Immigration Legislation (A detailed look at immigration legislation from the Colonial Period to the present, June 2, 2020), https://www.infoplease.com/us/immigration-legislation.
[^7]:“Era of Restriction,” USCIS, December 4, 2019, https://www.uscis.gov/about-us/our-history/overview-of-agency-history/era-of-restriction. 
[^8]:“The Emergency Quota Act - Laws.com,” Immigration, December 22, 2019, https://immigration.laws.com/emergency-quota-act.
[^9]:Rowan, “Immigration Legislation”.
[^10]:Mae M,Ngai, “The Architecture of Race in American Immigration Law: A Reexamination of the Immigration Act of 1924.” The Journal of American History 86, no. 1 (1999): 80, https://doi.org/10.2307/2567407.
[^11]:Rowan, “Immigration Legislation”.
[^12]:Zosa, Szajkowski, “The Attitude of American Jews to Refugees from Germany in the 1930’s.” American Jewish Historical Quarterly 61, no. 2 (1971): 101-102, http://www.jstor.org/stable/23877963.
[^13]:United States Congress. United States Statutes at Large, 80th Congress, 1948 (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1949), 1009. https://perspectives.ushmm.org/item/the-displaced-persons-act-of-1948/collection/displaced-persons-and-postwar-america
[^14]:“Mass Immigration and WWI,” USCIS, July 30, 2020, https://www.uscis.gov/about-us/our-history/mass-immigration-and-wwi.
[^15]:Kahn, Jeffrey. Mrs. Shipley's Ghost : The Right to Travel and Terrorist Watchlists, University of Michigan Press, 2013. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/uidaho/detail.action?docID=3415147
[^16]:“Era of Restriction.” USCIS.
[^17]:“The Immigration Border Patrol; its origin, activities, accomplishments, organization, and personnel.” (Internet Archive. Washington, Gov't print. off., 1949), 3. 
[^18]:“The Immigration Border Patrol” 6.
[^19]:“Alien Registration Forms on Microfilm, 1940 - 1944,” USCIS, February 25, 2021, https://www.uscis.gov/records/genealogy/historical-record-series/alien-registration-forms-on-microfilm-1940-1944.
